# DEM-Tools #

Python code for working with Digital Elevation Models and tile rendering.

License TBD

## Contents ##

**data**: code for fetching various DEM modules, plus a script for fetching DEM from various online sources. The **DEM Python module** simplifies access to digital elevation models from the SRTM and NED data sets. The module is a TileStache provider that automatically downloads elevation data for requested regions. It also renders that data into multiband TIFF files that have precalculated slope and azimuth data for the selected region. **hillfarm-seed.py** is a script for pre-generating a bunch of slope-and-aspect TIFF files for a selected region. It is used to seed the data directories for rendering.

**render**: code and a CGI script for rendering image tiles from elevation data. Hills.py uses TileStache and PIL to turn the slope-and-aspect TIFF files generated by hillfarm-seed.py and turn them in to image tiles suitable for use in an online slippy map.

**coverage-*.py**: scripts for downloading DEM data for specified regions. Not needed, redundant with the on-demand download code in the DEM module.

## Installation ##

DEM-Tools itself has no installation; all scripts run out of the directory.

DEM-Tools relies on a large stack of open source software. Version dependencies are not exact, but just notes on what is known to work.

* Python (2.7)
* gdal (1.8.1) and its dependencies
* PIL (1.1.7)
* Mapnik (0.7.1, 2.0 not tested) and its dependencies, including boost
* ModestMaps (1.2)
* TileStache (1.19.0)

On Debian or Ubuntu, all requirements can be installed via Apt and Python's easy_install/pip.

On MacOS, all requirements can be installed via HomeBrew and Python's easy_install/pip. Install Python first and pay close attention to HomeBrew's caveats about `/usr/local/share/python` in your PATH. There is a **known bug** ([issue #1](https://github.com/migurski/DEM-Tools/issues/1)) on MacOS where the multiband slope-and-aspect TIFFs generated by hillfarm-seed.py are corrupt and unusuable. For now we generate those input tiles on Linux: rendering works on MacOS.

## Usage ##

1. Clone the git repository.
2. cd to the data directory and run `python hillfarm-seed.py 10`. That will download necessary DEM data and then populate the `out` directory with slope-and-azimuth TIFFs for a small region near San Francisco at zoom level 10. If that works, you can then generate a larger set of TIFFs via a line like
`python hillfarm-seed.py -b 41 -121 42 -120 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15`
3. install `render/tile.cgi` as a CGI script in your favorite web server. You can then test it by loading a URL like http://localhost/tiles/hills/10/163/395.png where `localhost/tiles/hills` matches the installation path and `10/163/395.png` is the slippy math pap to a tile (in this case, near San Francisco at 37.84, -122.50).

`hillfarm-seed.py` downloads and generates many gigabytes of data in the `data/out` and `data/source` directories for large scale renders. Provision accordingly.